arm of Boyd Page at that time. He was right across
from the president's office in Coke. In Coke. Now,
did you, was there a dean of the college appointed
then, or did you? No. As I probably kind of
caustically said in this thing I wrote up, Rutter
had me doing two and three jobs for the price of one
all through my tenure under it. No, he, I was I
didn't even have the title of acting dean. I was the
dean of the college. I was running A&M for him.
Because when I first knew who you were, you were
vice president for academic affairs and? Dean of
the graduate college, yeah. But that came later. I
never, in fact, I was trying to talk him into hiring
somebody to direct and coordinate research, and
he said, okay, Hall, add that to your title.
And in those days, generally summarize what your
responsibilities were. My responsibility was to
do anything that Earl Rudder asked me to do, and he
expected me to run the academic ship, and that was
it, which included student relations. In the
early days, we didn't have a dean of students until
Hannigan was hired to replace him, to replace
Benny Zinn, that had been dean of students. There
were four school deans then? Well, I can name one.
There were agriculture, arts and sciences,
engineering,
veterinary medicine, and education came later
after Rutter was president. So there were four.
And when I get here in 59, Frank Hubert had just been
hired. To be dean. And Benson was. Dean of
engineering. Gus Watkins, and Al Price. Al Price
was veterinary medicine. Let's see. Am I leaving
out something? No, those are the four. No, that was
it, because I immediately talked Rutter into
reorganizing the whole campus, and that's when we
established the new colleges, like science and
geoscience and et cetera. In fact, they're all
there now. What was a routine week for you? and the
way Mr. Rudder related to you and the other key
administrators. Did you all have a weekly
administrators staff meeting? No, we didn't have
any formal staff meetings, but in the early days
right after he came, He would call, have a meeting
with Dorsey and me every evening after the others
had gone home. We'd stay there until we had hashed
out whatever he wanted done. Sometimes it would
run to 9 to 9.30 at night, even though many of us had
never eaten lunch that day.
No, he was a hard worker himself. In the early days,
he would be there early in the morning and stay
there late at night, except when he was out of town
on business, university or other business. Was he
a good listener? I would say he was, yeah. He would
listen to people he trusted, I'll put it that way.
And I'm not going to ask the negative on this one.
Who were those you think he trusted most? Well, in
the early days, only two people, Dorsey McCrory
and myself. He didn't trust the Deans. He wanted me
to interact with them and get the things done,
which I did, of course. And he didn't react
pleasantly to someone that tried to go around the
chain of command, did he? No, sir. Everything was
formal with him. You had to have appointments, and
you didn't meet around the bush with him at all.
Where as you first began to settle into that task,
were there some immediate problems that you felt
you had to deal with? Well, the main thing was
trying to get the existing organization schools
and so forth on a better basis, which we did, and
start hiring and assisting. We hire better
faculty, particularly those for the research
vent, which I insisted upon, Mr. Rudder endorsed.
Essentially,
the only research that was taking place in the
early days was in agriculture. Even engineering
wasn't conducting any research to mount
anything. I convinced Mr. Rutter that we should
model the entire research effort after
agriculture with joint appointments, teaching
and research, even in arts and sciences, although
that was the last one to follow that route. The
appointment of Frank Hubert was important to me.
He had been my seventh grade band director and my
12th grade principal. Yeah. How did he get
identified to be the new dean of arts and sciences?
This way. He was a well-known college, I mean, high
school superintendent. I believe he was at
Beaumont when he was hired. Orange. Orange,
you're right. Yeah, Orange. You're right. Yeah,
that's right.
He was hired primarily because he was a well-known
educator. And he knew Earl Rudder. That's another
reason. I think they had overlapped in Austin. Was
that it? Because Hubert had been the number two man
in the State Department of Education before going
back to Orange. Oh, you're right. You're right.
And I think. Yeah. Did you identify him, or did
Rutter, or do you remember? No, I had nothing to do
with the initial appointment of Frank Herbert.
Rutter handled it entirely. And I endorsed it. I
did convince him to establish a college of
education school initially and to let Hubert
decide whether we wanted to be dean of arts and
sciences or of education. And initially he took
arts and sciences, but later when we split it off to
education, he took that helm.
Staying with Mr. Rutter, normally he was... there
on campus all day, five days a week? When he wasn't
involved in some other activity, yeah. That was in
the early days. Later, I hesitate to say this, but
his health deteriorated badly and most people
weren't aware of this. No, I was not aware of that.
He was absent a lot from the office. And about three
or four years after he was president, he spent over
a month over at the O'Brien Hospital. And I used to
go over there every morning and spend an hour or so
discussing everything and getting his blessing
on actions that needed. What were his key concerns
as a decision maker?
Did he have any pet peeves and pet joys? Well, he
liked action. He didn't like people that would
dilly-dally around and not just bring something
to fruition. And he wanted it done in a hurry. And I
presume he probably didn't like theory as much as
he liked reality. No, he liked practicality, yes.
He wasn't adverse to theory as long as it tied into
the objective that we... Now, by 1962, A&M was
blessed by his friendship with John Connolly. And
I presume that we were helped in Austin by that
relationship? Oh, yeah, very much so. Connolly
was a strong supporter of A&M behind the scenes,
even though he was a UT graduate. But, I mean, he was
behind the scenes. He was supporting A&M. Oh,
yeah, he and Rutter were great friends. Probably
you may remember in the book I mentioned that the
surprise meeting, we were coming back from
Junction. He didn't tell me until we were Leaving
his place, his ranch, we stopped at his ranch on the
way back. And he said, we got a meeting I got to
attend.
And we stopped at Waco.
To my surprise, the people he was meeting was John
Connolly and LBJ and their staff.
I said, Mr. Rutter, maybe I better just stay at the
bar or go get something to eat or do something. He
said, no, you come in there. He said, get you
something to eat. Keep your damn mouth shut. Just
listen. That's what I did. Now, did Mr. Rutter have
a good sense of humor? Yeah, surprisingly he did.
He didn't display it too often, but he did. And
let's see, food. Did he have special foods he
enjoyed? Well, I don't know if you can call that a
typical Texan, but he liked the fiery Mexican
foods. In fact, even though he had stomach ulcers,
he used to get on me because, Mr. Rutter, why in the
hell do you eat that fiery stuff? It's burning your
stomach up. He said, Little hot stuff good for you.
One of the key things that I hope you can recall for
me is the Aspirations Report and all of those
studies. Do you know who came up with the idea that
we have a study of what A&M might become in 1976?
Well, I'd like to take credit for it, although I'm
sure there's a number of different inputs. The
Association of Former Students claim that they
had a strong influence, and I guess they did have
some effect. I convinced Mr. Rutter we were
supposed to do the Southern Association
accreditation in the coming year. I said, Mr.
Rutter, as long as we're doing this, and Dorsey and
I had talked it over with Rutter at great length,
why don't we do our own study, what we want to
become? because we got to do all most of this anyway
for the self-study and we got the people appointed
and so forth we'll just select a few and do it and we
did now uh as you recall i became the secretary of
the aspirations committee and we met for many
months and i think most of us on that committee were
dumbfounded on the day that we voted unanimously
for all of those tradition-shattering changes.
uh were you and mr rutter and other key
administrators surprised when our committee
turned in the report at the recommendations i
wasn't i think mr rutter was initially in fact a
certain part of it he wasn't going to endorse at all
until i convinced him that he would be in the best
interest to do it all right as i remember the
conversation with you one day you gave me uh... one
of the first draft copies which mister rudder had
annotated questions so forth and you ask me to
review it redrafted bring in and uh... i went back
and said to you and said that he in the number of
instances was questioning the committee's
subjective judgment and that we really believed
it and that therefore couldn't undo that and uh...
as i recall you said i'll state my job on the
committee's right to, all right, what was Mr.
Rutter's reaction when the final report wasn't
changed? Well, initially he was opposed to
certain parts of it, but it took Dorsey McCrory and
myself several months to convince him that we
should go ahead with it. I think some of the outside
influences also impinged on Mr. Rutter's
decision. As I have looked at it, I thought we had
Bill Moore for it. Bill Moore was one that was
endorsing it and telling him he would push it in the
legislature. John Connolly, behind the scenes,
was doing it. And the Washington LBJ. Ed Cooper
told me in the interview with him But in
retrospect, he believed that there had been a
conversation at the White House when LBJ told him
you've got to do it. There was. The former
representative from here. Teague. Yeah. He and
Rutter were cut from the same cloth. Oh, yes, yes. I
shouldn't tell you this, but when he used to come
down here to visit, Rutter would invite me over to
the president's house and over drinks. He would
ask me to key him in on several things that he and I
wanted to do and we had underway and so forth. And
they would kid each other. You'd think they hated
each other's guts to hear them talk, but that
really wasn't the case. They were blood brothers.
And then Jake Pickle, the Austin representative,
went way back. I don't know much about Pickle's
influence. I think it came later in the game. But
they were old, positive friends. Now, you need to
leave when? No, no, not right now. I've got a bad
case of kidneys. I've got to go. Oh, all right,
unplug. Oh, that's right. As long as we were
talking, is it on now? Yes. Talking about Earl
Rudder, I'd like to make a few comments. Most
people on the campus were scared to death of Earl
Rudder. In some cases, they had good reasons for
it. But the reason he and I got along and he knew from
the start that I wasn't afraid of him a bit. I would
stand up to him and talk to him, and he respected me
for it. And we got along very well as a result. And he
never did... Well, he got angry a couple times with
me, but he never did really blast me like I've seen
him blast some of the faculty and other deans and so
forth. And the result, a lot of them hated his guts,
just to be blunt about it. Now, I heard through the
grapevine that he had a high respect for Fred
Benson. Is that? He did, and I did, too. Fred and I
got along about as well as any of the deans. Al Price
was an excellent dean, too. Al was sort of quiet and
unassuming, but he got the job done. Because I
heard a version of his one day fussing at the deans.
maybe that's too weak a word, about that
aspirations report and that Benson said, Mr.
President, you ask them for their
recommendations. If you didn't want to hear what
they had to recommend, you shouldn't ask them.
He's entirely correct. Fred wasn't afraid of Mr.
Rutter either. That's the reason that Earl and
Fred got along well, too. Because you never show
any fear of Mr. Rutter because he'd be right on you.
Of those changes... non-compulsory core,
co-education, was Mr. Rutter more concerned
about one of those than the other? Initially, he
was opposed to all three. The least was changing
the name of college to university. But even that,
it took us a long time of argument with him to get him
convinced about it. The last I think that he
capitulated on was women. But he gave in. And with
all of these important people being supportive,
one day in 1970, not long before he went to the
hospital, I was over there begging for money for
the library. And I got him to smile because I said,
Mr. Rutter, they couldn't say you weren't a Texan,
you weren't an Aggie, you hadn't served the
country, that you were one of these fuddy-duddy
PhDs that were just here passing through. And he
grinned and he said, oh, I never thought of any of
that. And I said, oh, I'm sure you didn't. Yeah,
well.
No, he and I, and Dorsey, and not always, sometimes
just the two of us, would hassle these things out at
great length. It took me a long time to convince him
that this was for the good of A&M. He told me also in
that same session in 1970, he said, if your
committee had recommended the name that LSU has,
It would have gotten through. And I said, what do
you mean? And he said, the official name of the
school in Baton Rouge is Louisiana State
University and Agricultural and Mechanical
College. That's true. Still is. And he said, that
way, us old-timers could have called ourselves
Aggies and talked about A&M. And he said, then you
young kids could have talked about Texas State. I
now see his point very clearly. uh it was it was a
surprise to me uh then yeah he did argue for that he
didn't like a and m he says you're going to put
periods after a and after him i said no it's just
carrying over the old tradition of the
agricultural mechanical without spelling it out
just saying it's the a and m Texas A&M University.
It took him a long time. Yeah, he did bring up about
LSU's name. Now the board members,
I know you mentioned some of them a while ago during
that era. Sterling Evans and Boydle and I presume
Al Davies and...
Oh, the former Southwestern Bell president. The
board
came along with it? No, not all of the old Aggies
that were on the board were in favor of it, but they
finally went with it because they had political
pressure from other places put on, too. And I know
the former students, John Lindsay and- John
Lindsay was- He wasn't on the board at that time,
but he came on the board later. He was president of
the former students when they endorsed him.
You're right. I remember that now. I'm trying to
think. Jimmy Aston from Dallas was in that era.
Oh, there's a couple of others. In the 60s, did you
feel we were making progress? Yeah, we were making
great progress academically. I thought so. Oh,
yeah.
I thought we were making better progress than we
were in some of the administrative areas. No, I
thought we made great progress. In fact, I think it
set the real solid foundation for what happened
under your friend and mine, Jack, later. Let's go
on. You said, Mr. Rutter, you were aware of his
declining health because you saw him regularly
and so forth. Were there times that, in fact, you
and others had to make decisions and then relay the
action to Mr. Rutter? Not too often, only it would
be a rare occasion. I usually check with Mr. Rutter
about any major decision because I knew the way
that he reacted. Now, let's see. He brought in Dean
of Students... Hannigan. Hannigan. Yeah, Jim
Hannigan. And he came about not long after you
became the Chief Academic Officer. Yeah, he was
the...
Well, after Benny Zinn, the things just sort of,
student relations just sort of vacillated. In
fact, Mr. Rutter handled a lot of the student
relations himself in the early days. He delighted
doing that more than making major decisions.
Wouldn't he have enjoyed being the commandant of
the Corps? Oh, yeah. He would have enjoyed that
thoroughly. Now, I have the impression that Mr.
Rutter worked a lot, long hours, but almost never
took any of his frustrations and joys home. No, and
you can confirm this with Margaret if you ever talk
with her. Margaret knew less about what was going
on at A&M than almost any of the wives because he
never took, he would not discuss business at the
university or college in the early days with her.
She'll tell you that. She's praised me. She says,
you knew my husband better than I did. And I asked
Ann Rutter that question. And what were his, as you
remember the table conversation or anything at
home, what were his greatest joys and
frustrations? She said, I don't remember his ever
bringing anything home. That he would go back to
the office and work. Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah. Or he
wouldn't go home until late. Like when we were
having a session or something. No, you're right.
He never took things home. He never discussed it
and never let it affect his family life at all. In
your days of working with the legislature, which
legislators would you give gold stars to for their
support of A&M and higher education? Well, let me
preface my remark by saying that when Mr. Rutter
was active, he handled political matters
himself, legislative matters almost entirely.
It was only when I had to substitute for him or
something. Locally, of course, Bill Moore was by
far the
king, the key to the whole thing. And he carried the
legislature in those days. They didn't call him
Bull of the Brazzers for any reason. for no reason
because he was rough and tough on them over there
and got what he wanted through. A number of the
board members were very influential with the
politicians.
little short guy that used to fight with Bill Moore
that was in the legislature at that time. He was
from the Gulf Coast area. Oh, uh, Babe Swartz.
Yeah, Babe Swartz, little short guy that I call
him. Reminded me of Lincoln. Debater, Douglas, I
guess. Yeah, but in those days, a lot of the stuff
was handled behind the scenes, and I was never much
of a politician, and I never got involved with the
politicians except at Mr. Rudder's behest,
because that was one thing that he handled and
handled well. He allowed me to run the campus and do
the academics and see everything was going all
right on the campus, but politics, he wanted to be
involved. See, I have a Civic Club speech I've made
a number of times. I call it... Camelot on the
Brazos, using the Kennedy family use of that term.
And I tell people that those of us that were here in
the 60s and early 70s particularly, that we felt
that things were happening. that this place was
going. Oh, yeah, that's the thing that really
stimulated me, kept me going, because we were
putting in tremendous hours and working real
hard. It was trying, too, some of this stuff. I'm
sure it must have been. But that's what kept me
going, that I could see real progress happening.
And the fact that Mr. Rutter would almost give me
carte blanche on anything academic or research or
student-wise that I would recommend to him.
except initially about abolishing the Corps and
stuff like that. All right, do you remember any
academic triumphs that cause you great pleasure
to recall?
Well, I think initially when the board approved
Mr. Rudder's endorsement, the realignment or
reorganization of A&M, which is essentially what
it is today, with the exception of medicine. We
didn't have medicine at that time. I don't know.
The real thing was that Mr. Rutter allowed me to
work with the academic deans almost at will and to
get things done. And he would back me up, even
though he might not know the background of what
happened. If he said Hall said it, you're damn well
you're going to do it. I shouldn't use that
language. No, no, no. Now, the commencement
ceremonies here to me have always been
impressive. Were they pretty similar when you
started as the chief academic officer to what they
are now? Were they then shaking every hand,
calling every name? Yeah, every Aggie walked
across the stage, his name was called. I think I can
remember that we did it several times in the early
days. There was no air conditioning. When
Eisenhower gave the commencement address, we had
it out in the stadium or near the stadium. Oh, yeah.
Those days I didn't even own a cap and gown. I had to
run it each time That's how I used to bitch about
when I was a young sister professor to put that
money out Later his I got to be chairman. I bought
finally bought a cap and got figured I was gonna
have to Wear it every year two or three times a year.
I i've always thought that's one of the traditions
here that is a nice inclusive item that kind of
makes it an aggie family in fact the parents
usually came when they were looking forward to
seeing their son's name called out and therefore
when we ask them for their assistance five years or
fifty years later that positive last memory was
uh... was so good that you say you have an eleven
o'clock yeah i gotta go to through the dark let's
uh... let's then terminate today okay and we'll
resume uh... at another time of your convenience
well almost any time